# Introduction

## Purpose

**These guidelines describe best practices for software engineering in EOL.**
The purpose of these guidelines is to improve the development experience for
users, yield better software for EOL, encourage a common set of good software
engineering practices within EOL, and nurture software development skills
which will best serve EOL and its scientific community. As we try to improve
all of our software developments, these guidelines can be a resource to
improve development in similar ways towards similar goals.

**These guidelines are not intended to be mandates.** The guidelines encourage
some practices more strongly than others, but none are absolute requirements.
Most of the practices can be adopted individually and incrementally, for any
scale of software development, and by anyone developing software, not just
software engineers.

In this document, key practices will be emphasized in bold, while further
details and discussion may be referenced on a separate page. The bottom of
this page provides quick references with links to specific sections and
details.

Many people have contributed to this document, in particular Gary Granger,
John Allison, Linda Cully, and Sandra Thurn, with helpful input from many
others in EOL. It is meant to be an evolving and organic document that all in
EOL are welcome to edit. If you have questions about this document, email
Gary.

## Principles

The EOL software engineering first principles are the motivation for improving
our software development process and the measure of the effectiveness of our
software engineering practices. From these principles follow the best
practices we want to follow.

EOL software engineering practices emphasize and facilitate utility,
efficiency, flexibility, reliability, accountability, and cooperation.

Software development in EOL must be flexible to adapt to evolving research,
instruments, deployments, and data. Like the research instruments and research
data themselves, software will often be prototypes or cutting edge, but
quality and maintainability need not suffer. Development must adapt to
advances in software engineering tools and techniques.

Software developments must be efficient to make the most of limited software
engineering resources to support EOL's mission. They must accommodate
timelines dictated by available instrument hardware and field project
deadlines.

The goal of any EOL development is to provide a useful tool or product to the
EOL user community. EOL software engineers must be accountable and available
to that community. We must work closely with the community to understand
needs, solve problems, and fulfill requirements.

The culture among EOL software engineers is based on supporting science and
solving technical problems in a spirit of cooperation across all disciplines.
